---
title: John Stevens on baptism
description: Regular readers will (both) be aware that I've been trying to get a better understanding and appreciation of baptism.
tags:
- Christianity
---
Regular readers will (both) be aware that I've been trying to get a better understanding and appreciation of [baptism]({% post_url 2013-12-27-ecclesiocredopaedobaptism %}), that wonderful sign of cleansing and new life that Jesus Christ gave to his church.

So I was delighted to find the [latest issue](http://www.affinity.org.uk/foundations-issues/issue-63) of [Affinity](http://affinity.org.uk/)'s [_Foundations_](http://www.affinity.org.uk/resources/foundations) journal devoted to this topic.

I haven't read all of it yet, but one article I have read is by [FIEC](http://www.fiec.org.uk/) National Director [John Stevens](http://www.john-stevens.com/): [_Infant Baptism: Putting Old Wine into New Wineskins?_](http://www.affinity.org.uk/foundations-issues/issue-63-article-2---infant-baptism-putting-old-wine-into-new-wineskins) He argues compellingly (in my view!) that baptism ought to be administered only to people who profess faith in Christ. God gave Abraham a promise, and this promise was physically enacted in the sign of circumcision, which served as a reminder of that promise (much as the rainbow served as a reminder of the promise given to Noah). The promise given to Abraham has now been fulfilled in Jesus Christ, and the blessings promised to Abraham are now a present reality in those who have faith in Christ. Baptism is a sign that the promise has been fulfilled, and is therefore appropriate only for those in whom the promise to Abraham has already found its fulfilment through the receiving of the Spirit. Hence baptism should be given only to believers, preferably as soon as possible after conversion. In contrast, attempts to justify the baptism of infants lead to all sorts of inconsistencies, and these are highlighted with great clarity. I was hinting towards this sort of argument in my post on [_Should infants be baptised?_]({% post_url 2012-08-27-should-infants-be-baptised %})

However, there are some points later in the article that I find very difficult. Stevens' view of baptism is that it is entirely for the benefit of the new believer; it is purely a means whereby God assures the new believer of his love towards them personally. Rebaptism is perfectly acceptable, if someone is converted after they have been baptised. Even non-baptism is condoned (as long as it doesn't cause problems for the believer's conscience), since "It seems to me that there comes a point at which baptism ceases to serve any useful purpose because the appropriate time for baptism has long passed." Given this radically individualistic understanding of baptism, and its significance only for the individual believer personally, baptism consequently has no real place in the life of the church, and shouldn't be a requirement for church membership or any other aspect of Christian fellowship. Instead, the baptism that is of relevance is the baptism of the Spirit, which is entirely distinct from baptism itself. (This last distinction seems to follow from Stevens' apparent memorialist understanding of the sacraments.)

But does such a low view of baptism within the life of the church follow necessarily from the credobaptist position that Stevens has presented so convincingly? It does seem to be an inevitable consequence of attempting to hold, first, that infants not only _should not_ be baptised but also _cannot_ be baptised, and, second, that those countless believers who (on that reckoning) _have not been baptised_ should nonetheless be welcomed wholeheartedly as genuine believers. But the mistake seems to be to confuse the question of whether infants _should_ be baptised with the question of whether infants _can_ be baptised. And this confusion seems to stem from a failure to distinguish between the outward sign and the inner reality. If we are careful to distinguish between the two, it seems perfectly possible to say that infants _ought_ not be baptised, but that if they _are_ baptised, then they really and truly have been baptised, and ought to be treated as members of the visible church—as long as their _past_ baptism is accompanied by a _present_ faith in Christ. I've tried to argue this point at more length in my post on [_Can infants be baptised?_]({% post_url 2012-11-06-can-infants-be-baptised %})
